And then we paid him back. And that was sort of
symbolic of the community as it was in those days.
Was there any place that was kind of off limits? Was
Uncle Ed's still going? Uncle Ed's was still
going. It wasn't off limits. It was a pretty going
place. Uncle Ed's was torn down. I guess it was my
end of my junior year. It must have been the end of my
junior year. So that would have been in not going.
to be sure I hadn't taken it over. And it was still
going until about your junior year? I think they
tore it down the end of my junior year. I can't
remember for sure. The reason I know it was during
my time here is we had a crepper ceremony for it. Do
you know what a crepper ceremony was? Describe.
This was really oriented around people who got a
Dear John letter. And there were a lot of those in
those days. Typically you'd come here as a
freshman and you'd have a high school girlfriend
and somewhere along that fall semester you'd get
the letter. And we had a little ceremony. uh and in
the ceremony you would all dress up in your
raincoats and ponchos i mean ponchos and pots and
you would carry brooms and you would mourn your way
through the halls of the then you would go in you
would all the entire outfit would crowd into one of
the gang restrooms and the person that was being
affected was called to the center and the letter
was read to everyone and then it was torn up and put
into the crapper there were there were four no
there were five uh uh sit down crappers and then two
urinals making seven and you had a 21 crapper
salute there were people stationed at each one and
you would sprinkle a letter around and you would
flush it and then of course you would make your way
back to your room and that well we had one of those
for uncle ed's when it was torn down it was pretty
tragic thing and so we we had a crapper sermon All
right, now during that day, if someone wanted to
just go drink some beer, where did they go? Most of
the time, like as a freshman and sophomore, you
would go to the river. You'd find somebody, you'd
get a couple of cases, or not cases, but kegs. You'd
go out and find a place on the Brazos River where it
was safe and away from everything. And then you'd
swim in the river and drink and play games. it was
just common and was generally all male all male
absolutely then if you if someone wanted to drink
hard liquor i mean drink whiskey yeah well it
wasn't a lot of that that went on but you went to
whiskey you had to go to whiskey bridge obviously
to get it and there was it wasn't that hard to buy i
had a A fellow that was a senior in my outfit when I
was a freshman, he was an ag engineer and had a
drawing table in his room. Name was Jerry Simpton.
Jerry is the president of the bank in Del Rio today
and would deny this, I'm sure. But Jerry had a side
business which was converting your driver's
license to one showing that you were 21 years of age
or older. And it was, in those days, the driver's
license was paper. And he would pin it to his
drawing board and very adroitly cut out the right
numbers and switch them, and then laminate the
driver's license. And it was quite a talent. He was
very good at it. So there were several people that
had a driver's license that allowed you to. And of
course, the folks that were selling the liquor
would wink, and it really wasn't a big problem. By
the time I was an upperclassman, there were a few
places around. Uncle Ed's was a place you drank
beer and ate barbecue. Martin's, a place called
Eastgate Lounge, which was just a little bar. And
then there were some places in North Bryan, which
probably a person wouldn't go to today. But in
those days, Highway 21 from downtown Bryan headed
west, there were probably a half a dozen just who to
hell places that you could go and drink beer and
listen to jukebox. Let's go back to your being
Corps Commander. You get here in the fall. Did
anyone give you a kind of a guideline or
responsibility as a set of goals or anything? Not
really. I mean, that was pretty much ours to
develop, although Colonel Baker, who was the
commandant, was... I mentioned a couple of things
a while ago. Also, just fundamental discipline
and harassment and that sort of thing was
difficult to control in those days. And he had a
major concern, which was an appropriate one,
about the rate of departure of kids coming in here.
So one of the things we worked very hard on starting
the year was to try to retain as many as possible,
and with some success. And we had a really good
group of commanders that year. A guy named Pat
Gamble, who's a four-star in the Air Force, was
commander of one of the Air Force wings. Arturo
Esquivel, who was commander of the Air Division,
which was the senior Air Force commander, and a
couple of guys on the Army side that were just
outstanding. So we had good solid, not to any
surprise to you, good leadership selected. But
what was the Corps enrollment then? Do you
remember? We started that fall probably close to
3,000. And by the end of the year, we were probably
down to Oh, somewhere around 25, 2600 would be my
guess. So it was, you know, it was already down
significantly. As the fall semester got
underway, what was the daily routine for the
weekday for the corps commander? Not sure I can
remember. It was long days, that's all I remember.
I had a deputy corps commander named Robert Bean
who was an electrical engineer, had been on corps
staff, very, very bright guy. The thing I remember
about Robert is he was so disciplined that he would
go to class and then come home every night at the end
of the day, no matter what the hour, and recopy his
notes such that you could read them. It was almost
like reading a typewriter. I was not that
disciplined, at least as a scholar. But Robert,
the reason I mention Robert is that Robert got up
every morning and went to breakfast. So he was one
of those guys we could always depend on. If the
whole staff wasn't going, he was always there. But
typically you got up, you started early, got to
chow, and then by the time I got to my senior year, I
had a light load. I only had 15 hours each semester.
And unlike my early years where I had a lot of lab
classes, I didn't have as many labs. Mostly I had
liberal arts and journalism classes my senior
year. So it was a little bit easier to manage
through. But I probably didn't go to class a lot. I
spent a lot of time in the Commandant's office, in
Hannigan's office, President Rutter's office,
and in dealing with leadership activities of the
Corps.
Did you eat most of your three meals a day in the
dining hall? Yeah, for the most part. I mean, by the
time you got to be a senior, you were getting a
little tired of the Duncan Hall chow. And so you
would, especially in the spring, you would find
ways to slide off campus in the evenings a lot of the
time and grab a meal. But for the most part, it was,
and you were in formation, so you were, you know,
you were actually commanding the evening and noon
and morning formations. All right, and it was
expected that you as Corps commander be present
for all three of those formations. Well, for the
most part. I wasn't there for all of them. But, I
mean, you always had someone. If you weren't, you
had to make sure there was somebody to stand in
and... take the review as you look on that back on
that year what are the most positive events you
recall well i think it was for me again a small town
country boy it was sort of the awakening to a bigger
world you know i remember for example i was the
student host of edward teller the infamous
creator of the, I guess, the hydrogen bomb. And he
was here for Great Issues or SCONA or one of those
events. And I was the, and you know, I mean, this was
to me a pretty sobering thought. And just being
involved in essentially, to a great degree,
managing the institution from a student
standpoint. It was, again, a real eye opening. I
don't know, you don't go from being a small town
country boy one day to being a cosmopolitan,
urbane person the next, but it was this it was
probably as profound a changing experience for me
as I could ever have. Still having, you know,
plenty of fun and camaraderie and, you know, being
around friends and doing student things, but it
was, you know, you became a, you really became a
grown-up in real ways during that year. One of the
interesting negatives is that a reminder again,
we were in the Vietnam era, so there was sort of a, I
didn't think about it so much at the time because it
was sick humor or it was just a way to survive it
because the stories ran through the dormitory
about people that you knew that were there and what
was happening to them and the forecasted life
expectancy of a second lieutenant in battle and
that kind of thing. But there was a bit of a pall on
the Corps in those days, because the expectation
was. And sort of a theme song was, what the hell are
they gonna do, send me to Vietnam? I mean,
everybody knew. The minute you got your
commission and as soon as you got through with a bit
of orientation training in the Army, you were
going. So it was a, interesting and maturing time
but also a very sobering and uh sort of uh uh you know
strange time around the place i asked this one with
this great face what kind of protest anti-war
protest did y'all have to cope with the one i
remember best was i remember i told you about that
summer that my friend and i stayed here well the
word filtered through the dorms that there was a
SDS organizer from Austin coming to the campus and
that wanted to be sure everybody in the dorms knew
this was happening. You know, sort of implying
that we would all want to go out and hear what he had
to say. Well, sure enough, the guy did show up and he
was at Hensel Park and that old strange looking
white pavilion thing that was built over there. He
got about three or four words out of his mouth and
all of a sudden he was on the tops of a set of thousand
hands being literally carried to the city limits.
I will to this day believe that probably either
Earl Rudder or Hannigan or Bob Melcher, who was
sort of a, Bob was a guy of some intrigue, had gotten
the word out about this organizer coming and knew
exactly what would happen. Because the place was
very, you know, we were completely out of sync with
what was happening in the rest of the world. I can
remember sitting in my dorm room and hearing I Want
to Hold Your Hand sung by the Beatles the first
time. That was in 63 or 64. By the time I got to be a
senior in the corps, the rest of the world were
smoking dope and wearing flowers in their hair. We
didn't even see it, hardly. On the matter of drugs,
were you aware of any A&M kids smoking anything?
Never. Never smelled the stuff until I got to
Vietnam. Did, were you and your buddies even aware
of the words cocaine? No. And crack? No. You know, a
heroin addict was someone who was the absolute
lowest depths of society. And actually my wife,
North Texas was a party school in those days, and my
wife became aware of the marijuana stuff while she
was up there. But I never knew about it, other than
just what you might read or see. During that year as
court commander, did you have to cope with any
tragedies here?
One of the, you know, this is, I'll tell you a little
bit about how much the place has changed. We had a
fella named Sammy Green, who I believe was the
first black to be commissioned from A&M. And Sammy
came into the Corps as a junior, I think. Sammy was
not the brightest bulb and not the best soldier,
and as a result, That plus his race, he kept being
harassed.
And it was in good humor, but it wasn't. I mean, it
was because, I mean, here's one of the first
minorities other than Hispanic. Hispanics were
widely accepted in a part of the core culture.
Blacks were not. But Rutter called me one day and
called me over to his office, and he was... My
senior year, I had a phone in the room because I was
corps commander. And when it rang, I usually knew
who was calling. And he didn't go through the chain
of command. The chain of command was Rutter to
Davis. Cadet Davis, come to my, or Eddie Joe, I
don't know what he said. Come to my office. Yes,
sir. So I show up. And he tells me that Cadet Green
has been found on the courthouse lawn I'm trying to
remember where it was. It was either Brenham or
Navasota or I guess Independence. Not
Independence, but Anderson was the county seat.
Well, that is close, you know, tied to the flagpole
and, again, quote in good humor. But he did say to
me, if it happens again, I'm going to start with
you, and we're going to wipe them out until we get
down to wherever it is that this is happening. I
mean, it was very plain and clear. So we had a little
meeting of all the commanders and made it clear
that Cadet Green was not going to be hauled off in
his birthday suit again and treated this way.
That's sort of one of the kinds of things. And that
one. Did it work? Yeah, we didn't. Again, Sammy was
a guy that didn't have a lot to offer, but he was
there, and as a result of all that, he finally made
it through and I think got commissioned. I'm
almost sure he did. But we didn't have any more
incidents that I knew of. We probably had a few
more. I don't remember any other particular
tragedies. We had a lot of... again, controversy
between the civilian students and the Corps, had a
good friend named
Heaton, a nephew of the infamous Heaton that was
the registrar, who was the civilian student,
whatever we called it, president of the civilian
student body. And he and I were friends and had been
friends for a long time, and so it was One of the
things we worked on a lot was that relationship and
trying to improve it. And I think that paid off
throughout the year. What was it like to be the
Corps commander for a Corps trip? Well, now that
was really magic. I mean, you think about...
staring down the streets of Congress Avenue, or in
the case of Dallas, I guess it was Maine or Elm, I
don't remember. But to lead the Corps cadets on a
major Corps trip was quite a... How did you feel?
Oh, you tingled all over. And how were Aggies
treated by the observers? You know, the people
were... The people that turned out for that Corps
trip, and there were a lot of them in those days. I
had an old aunt from Wichita Falls who was really a
great, great aunt. And she came, she drove with her
husband in a big Chrysler all the way from Wichita
Falls to Dallas to see Eddie Joe lead the Corps of
Cadets. And it was, you know, I mean, you had that
coming from all over the state. And then the people
that were locals would turn up. Where did you stay?
Do you remember? I believe at the Adolphus. All
right. And all the members of the Corps paid for
their own accommodations? You just found your own
way. There was no organization to it except where
you showed up, the place to arrive and begin the
parade. I don't remember for sure, but I believe
the Adolphus by that time was kind of a rundown old
hotel in Dallas. And there was a court trip party at
the Adolphus. So I think that's where I stayed. And
the marches began at 10 o'clock or so? Yeah, it
depends on when the game was. But in those days,
most of the games were standard time, like 2
o'clock in the afternoon. So the parade would have
started at 9 or 10 in the morning. Describe Earl
Rudder as you saw him as corps commander. You know,
it's hard for me to do that without reflecting on
what I know about him now. And before I talk about
Rutter, I want to talk about Hannigan a little bit.
Because Jim Hannigan was a guy that we all, you
know, if you ever went to Hannigan's office, it was
too late. you were on your way out, or you were maybe
out of the Corps, because it all got dealt with
pretty much before you got to him. And as a result of
that, Hannigan was feared and was viewed as a, oh I
don't know, sort of a stoic, tough general.
I got to know him as I came back to work here not long
after being a student, five years and he was one of
the kindest, gentlest, most down to earth guys
I've ever known. And I dearly developed a great
admiration for him, but never did that as a student
because I didn't see that side of him. Rutter a lot
the same way I would guess. Rutter was a again a guy
that was very firm, very, he had a sense of humor,
but it wasn't easy as a cadet to, you know, find it. I
remember my interview with him. when this was, you
know the selections basically had been made by
everybody and he had to be the final check off. So I
go up to his office, Nelda Green, my old friend was
then Nelda Rowell, was in an office that I would
later occupy as deputy chancellor. But you know,
you keep your nose clean and in a few years you make
good. But anyway, Nelda always made you feel
comfortable and sort of warm and nice. And I went
into his office, and he was still on the phone. She
took me in, and she just said, sit down. And so he
pointed at the chair. And he got off the phone, and
he stood up, shook hands, and he said, Eddie Joe,
you've been recommended to be the corps
commander. He said, you're a fine looking young
man. I just have one question for you. And I said,
yes, sir. What's that, Mr. Rutter? He said, are you
tough enough?
Pretty tough question for a 20-year-old cadet.
And I said, well, Mr. Rutter, I'm as tough as I need
to be. Whatever it takes to get the job done, I'll
do. He said, that's all I need to hear. And then we
chit-chatted, talked about a lot of things that
were going on. And he was warm and friendly and very
much enjoyed it. I've had some other occasions
when I was called to his office. It wasn't so warm
and friendly. During that year? No, no, that was my
junior year. No, no, no, but during your year as
Corps Commander. Oh, absolutely. Sammy Green
would have been an example. I mean, there wasn't
any question. I mean, it was clear when I left there
what I had to do. And, you know, he made it clear. And
as I said, chain of command was not in his
vocabulary. If there was an issue going on with the
Corps, now he would obviously Denzel Baker, the
commandant, would know about it and was involved
in it, but he fired that shot right down to the
corner room in dorm two and expected me to take care
of it. If you needed any advice about how to respond
to one of his, to whom did you turn? Well, there were
a couple of places. There were two guys in the
commandant's office in those days. One was a guy
named Ken Nicholas. Frank K, I guess, but went by
Nick. He was a retired sergeant major from the Army
and stayed on there as sort of an administrative
assistant or whatever. And Nick was a guy that you
could go close the door and sit down and talk to. And
there was another guy named Lieutenant Colonel
Brooks, who I don't remember whether he was an
active duty officer or a reservist, but he
likewise was a guy If you got in a box and you didn't
want to go talk to Denzel Baker because you knew you
probably would be in the box with him, you go talk to
one of those two guys, they'd give you good advice.
So that was, and there were a few other places
around the campus in those days. Joe Buser was, I
guess, editor of the Texas Aggie, and Buck Wirus
was the Association of Former Students head. And
Ed Cooper was the assistant to the president, and
you know on sort of campus politics issues and
things like that that were testy, I could go sit
down with one of those guys and get some pretty good
advice.
I remember Buser and Wiris both probably pulled my
fat out of the fire a number of times. Now,
interestingly, and this might surprise you a
little bit, but Wayne Stark was not one of my real
mentors or confidants. Wayne was a guy who, Wayne
was very good at picking people out and sort of
saying, you know, I think he's got the stuff. And I
was one of those. But Wayne had done a thing or two
that didn't sit well with me. One was he criticized
one of my best friends about deciding to marry a
girl and said that she was beneath him. And, you
know, this was really not. But you knew Wayne well
enough to know that he would be that
straightforward and honest. But he was not a guy
that I would go sit down with necessarily. and
share with. Later, after I left, as I said, he
dogged me until I finally agreed to apply to go to
business school. And I have a very high regard for
him, but he was not one that, Dick Potts was another
guy that I could always trust to get good advice
from. would not let me out of Genetics 301, but he
did give me good advice. And there were probably a
number of others that I just, that don't come to
mind. But around the campus, There were always a
lot of, in those days, and they were mostly
faculty, some involved in student
organizations, but mostly faculty that you could
always call on to get good advice. Now, the Corps
commander in those days got no compensation, did
he? No scholarship? No, no, no. There was a
Commander's pay, I think it was $10 a month. What
you got there was for handing out the keys and
taking up the keys and making sure people's room
was sandwiched, whatever all that was. There was a
little sweetener to your pay. Was there any good
bull prank played on you by your old buddies when
they learned you'd been selected as Corps
Commander? Oh, yes. Describe it. We have to do this
on tape. If it is tapeable. Well, I lived in the
Speza area my junior year, so we were at Chow, and
announcements were made, and it was announced who
the new corps commander was gonna be. Well, I was on
the tops of a lot of hands on my way to the fish pond,
thrown in the fish pond, and then taken back to my
dorm, and we had a ceremony that's rather,
Byzantine now, but they shaved you in places that
you shouldn't be shaved, which made it very
uncomfortable at summer camp. But that was the
ritual. And as far as you knew, you were not the
first one? Oh, heavens no. To have that? And for
reasons of survival, you were very still.
Let's see. I'm now looking at campus activities
and so forth. Was Guyon Hall still an important
place for Yeah, you know, you went there to watch
We've Never Been Licked, and you went there for
major assemblies, like the Bevo Assembly, and the
first one you first got to school, you know, to be
told nobody would be left when you got through.
Yeah, it was a place. It was pretty craggy in those
days. They used to have the Cotton Pageant, which
was a big event, you know, where women would be
imported from various places around the state and
be candidates for the Cotton Queen, I think is what
it was called. So that was, and you know, usually as
a student in agriculture, you were involved even
early on in that and hosting people and trying to
get lucky enough to find one of those pretty ones
to, you know, escort. Now you met this special
young lady when you were a junior? Junior. And when
she came down here, where did she spend the night?
Where did she stay? Well, you know, that first trip
I don't even remember. I think maybe she might have
stayed with her parents in Marlin, you know, gone
back to Marlin. The second trip, though, I invited
her at the end of that visit to come back for the
combat and military ball weekend. and she stayed
at the Sabre Motel. I had two guys, two fish in my
outfit, Fish Harvey and Fish Mac Frazier, who
played the guitar and sang to come over and be in the
room when she arrived to serenade her. And she
still, they still, and she still remembers that
event. All right, now this sounds like that you
began to feel this was serious pretty quickly.
Well, she was pretty special. You know, and I was
trying to save her from all those strange people up
in North Texas. There you go, there you go. Her
brother was an Aggie, class of 62, and he was a
little worried about her as well. And when he found
out she had a date with an Aggie, he was
encouraging. How were young women at an A&M social
event, a dance or a football game, in fact, how were
they treated by Aggies? I would say they were
treated like princesses, which is just the way you
would expect to be treated.
having not seen it from that side it's hard for me to
imagine but it must have been a wonderful
experience for a young woman to come here and be see
all these guys in uniforms which we saw every day
but to them it must have been quite special and you
know just being treated and you always had a
corsage you always you know you put on the dog and
you did everything you could do within reason and
brand college station to make them feel special
and welcome if i were to ask your wife about how she
felt they were treated do you think she would
concur